docs: gitlab hydra integration #2007 (#2014)
ory/hydra: docs/docs/guides/gitlab.mdx

command-line-client available is quite useful. So let's install hydra as
explained in the [installation-guide](../install).
You'll also need [docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and
[docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/).

The [hydra-5-min-tutorial](../5min-tutorial) might
be worth checking out upfront. It'll a give a nice quick overview how OAuth2 is
working within hydra with a minimal example. We assume basic knowledge, here.

If you have not yet the source code of hydra, which we'll need for the `docker-compose`
yaml-files, clone this repository:

```shell
git clone git@github.com:ory/hydra-gitlab-example.git
```

## Spin up the instances

Gitlab has some [documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/omnibus/docker/) about
how to use their docker-images. It has also an example for docker-compose. So change into the directory with the Hydra 
source code and create a new file quickstart-gitlab.yml with this content:

```yaml
version: '3'

services:
  gitlab:
    image: gitlab/gitlab-ce:latest
    restart: always
    hostname: gitlab.example.com
    environment:
      GITLAB_OMNIBUS_CONFIG: |
        external_url 'http://gitlab.example.com:8000/'
    ports:

>       - "443:443" # https

Reviewer: Is `443` a privileged port that needs sudo?

Author: IMHO yes, as all ports < 1024 are priviledged. However, the port is not used in the POC-guide , so i'll remove that mapping! Also the ssh-port is not used. The editing is currently not done via ssh and we even consider to do the editing via the host-file-system. So i'll remove that one as well.

Reviewer: SGTM :)

      - "8000:8000" # http
      - "2222:22" # ssh
    volumes:
    - '$GITLAB_HOME/config:/etc/gitlab'
    - '$GITLAB_HOME/logs:/var/log/gitlab'

>     - '$GITLAB_HOME/data:/var/opt/gitlab'

Reviewer: Given that `$GITLAB_HOME` is set to `GITLAB_HOME=$(pwd)/gitlab` we can probably reduce errors (e.g. on Windows) by just using `./gitlab/config:/etc/gitlab`

explained in the [installation-guide](../install).
You'll also need [docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and
[docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/).

The [hydra-5-min-tutorial](../5min-tutorial) might
be worth checking out upfront. It'll a give a nice quick overview how OAuth2 is
working within hydra with a minimal example. We assume basic knowledge, here.

If you have not yet the source code of hydra, which we'll need for the `docker-compose`
yaml-files, clone this repository:

```shell
git clone git@github.com:ory/hydra-gitlab-example.git
```

## Spin up the instances

Gitlab has some [documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/omnibus/docker/) about
how to use their docker-images. It has also an example for docker-compose. So change into the directory with the Hydra 
source code and create a new file quickstart-gitlab.yml with this content:

```yaml
version: '3'

services:
  gitlab:
    image: gitlab/gitlab-ce:latest
    restart: always
    hostname: gitlab.example.com
    environment:
      GITLAB_OMNIBUS_CONFIG: |
        external_url 'http://gitlab.example.com:8000/'
    ports:
      - "443:443" # https

>       - "8000:8000" # http

Author: Why do you want to change it to 80? This is also a privileged port. Depending on how docker is installed on a system, this might or might not be an issue. On Linux it's not a problem as the dpkg-based installation is using root-privileges. However it's a good idea to avoid issues with that.

>       - "8000:8000" # http

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I can't understand the official image “gitlab/gitlab-ce:13.0.6-ce.0” code is “ EXPOSE 22 443 80”，Why do you use 8000 to map 8000，Not 8000 mapping 80 .

---
id: gitlab
title: Gitlab Hydra integration
---

> import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl'

Reviewer: This is no longer required :)

Gitlab has several OAuth2 related features. The relevant here is the possibility

> to sign into GitLab with (almost) any OAuth2 provider, in this case hydra. The documentation for this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to sign into GitLab with (almost) any OAuth2 provider, in this case ORY Hydra. The documentation for this
```

> is quite generic and also not very detailed. So, in this guide, we'll connect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is kept generic on purpose. So, in this guide, we'll connect
```

> gitlab's omniauth-connector to ORY Hydra. We'll do that in a docker-based

Reviewer: Please also add a link to omniauth-connector!

```suggestion
GitLab's omniauth-connector to ORY Hydra. We'll do that in a docker-based
```

lab-environment in order to investigate the details before you do something like
this in production.

## Preparation

Even though we're mostly using hydra in a docker-container, having the
command-line-client available is quite useful. So let's install hydra as
explained in the [installation-guide](../install).
You'll also need [docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) and
[docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/).

The [hydra-5-min-tutorial](../5min-tutorial) might
be worth checking out upfront. It'll a give a nice quick overview how OAuth2 is
working within hydra with a minimal example. We assume basic knowledge, here.

> If you have not yet the source-code of hydra, which we'll need for the docker-compose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have not yet the source code of hydra, which we'll need for the `docker-compose`
```

yaml-files, clone this repository:

```shell

> git clone git@github.com:ory/hydra-gitlab-example.git

Reviewer: Is this correct? If so, we need to open source that first, right?

Author: No, it's not correct. Instead the user should checkout hydra. In the 5min-tutorial that is omitted and it starts with "change to the directory where the hydra-sourcecode ..." but i like the idea to include that in the Guide. Happy to also remove it completely. What do you think?

Reviewer: No let's keep it here. There will be at least 10 people who do not understand that they need to run the commands (and especially which ones!) from another link. It's better to have explicit instructions.

You can move the gitlab docker-compose files to `contrib/gitlab`

```

## Spin up the instances

Gitlab has some [documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/omnibus/docker/) about
how to use their docker-images. It has also an example for docker-compose. So change into the directory with the Hydra 

> source code and create a new file quickstart-gitlab.yml with this content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
source code and create a new file `quickstart-gitlab.yml` with this content:
```

```yaml
version: '3'

services:
  gitlab:
    image: gitlab/gitlab-ce:latest
    restart: always
    hostname: gitlab.example.com
    environment:
      GITLAB_OMNIBUS_CONFIG: |
        external_url 'http://gitlab.example.com:8000/'
    ports:
      - "443:443" # https
      - "8000:8000" # http
      - "2222:22" # ssh
    volumes:
    - '$GITLAB_HOME/config:/etc/gitlab'
    - '$GITLAB_HOME/logs:/var/log/gitlab'
    - '$GITLAB_HOME/data:/var/opt/gitlab'
```

> Now we can spinup the instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can spinup the instances:
```

```shell
export GITLAB_HOME=$(pwd)/gitlab
docker-compose -f quickstart.yml \
    -f quickstart-postgres.yml -f quickstart-gitlab.yml \
    up --build
```

> Gitlab will take some time until it's up. You'll see the logs in the output. So you need to open a new terminal for the next steps. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GitLab will take some time until it's up. You'll see the logs in the output. So you need to open a new terminal for the next steps. 
```

Make sure to have the Domain-Name
`gitlab.example.com` assigned to `127.0.0.1` before accessing the
[gitlab-frontend](http://gitlab.example.com:8000). On an unixoid system, this is done by adding
a line like this to your `/etc/host/file`:
```
127.0.0.1 gitlab.example.com
```

With the initial login, you will have to change the root-password.

## Modify the gitlab configuration for OAuth2

The gitlab-configuration can be modified in the container like such:

```shell
docker-compose -f quickstart.yml  -f quickstart-postgres.yml -f quickstart-gitlab.yml exec gitlab vim /etc/gitlab/gitlab.rb
```

Using vim might not be your first choice and if you never used it, it's quite
unintuitive and confusing but it's worth learning the basics to do simple changes like this. Check the basics

> [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ggSyF1SVFr4).

Reviewer: Why not use `nano` instead here? Might help people get this done quicker

Author: Yes, good point.

The first configuration is already done by overriding the
[external_url](https://docs.gitlab.com/omnibus/settings/configuration.html#configuring-the-external-url-for-gitlab)
via an environment-variable within the quickstart.yaml. Now, at around line 433,
add this:

> ```ruby

Reviewer: Is it not possible to include this file in the GitHub repository and tell gitlab to mount it? That way we could link people to it and you could make modifications using your IDE instead of SSHing

Author: Maybe this is doable but i have at least some concerns:
1. What's wrong with asking people to do such complex things like editing files on folders. It's also a kind of filter. I don't want to argue with someone how to edit files. If he doesn't know that, he should learn it first.
2. We would pollute the repo with such non-hydra-specific stuff. The same would be true for the quickstart-gitlab.yml which i avoided to create upfront because of this argument.
3. Potential issues with access-rights. The gitlab-container seem to run as root and so that file is not even readable on the "host".  It is probably solvable but  it's will also probably increase non-hydra specific complexity of the guide and/or will encourage insecure practices. Maybe 3 is entirely wrong but ...

I can't see much pro-arguments other than it's more convenient. This is not a typical dev-guide. This is an operations-guide and operators core-compentency should be dealing with such issues seamlessly. It's also not very complicated as the guide-user simply needs to copy&paste a command.
We have something very similiar with the hydra-binary. Instead of installing it manually on the host, the command in the 5min-tutorial gets a bit longer and uses the binary on the container.

Reviewer: > Maybe this is doable but i have at least some concerns:

Good documentation that is easy to follow is what we should strive for. Great products have great documentation and the time it takes us to implement will be worth the investment if we have 25 happy adopters who just got it working with little effort and frustration. There is already enough frustration involved in OAuth2 and adjacent products.

> We would pollute the repo with such non-hydra-specific stuff. The same would be true for the quickstart-gitlab.yml which i avoided to create upfront because of this argument.

Typically, stuff like this would end up in the `/contrib` folder, see for example https://github.com/ory/kratos/tree/master/contrib/quickstart

I would be ok with having this here. We could also move the GitLab docker-compose file there, which would clean up the root view.

> I can't see much pro-arguments other than it's more convenient. This is not a typical dev-guide. This is an operations-guide and operators core-compentency should be dealing with such issues seamlessly. It's also not very complicated as the guide-user simply needs to copy&paste a command.

The problem I see is that editing stuff in Docker Container FS is usually a bad idea because the FS is ethermal. A simple volume clean up or accidental kill will mean that you have to redo everything. It's just not good practice and given the very easy alternatives (mounting a volume with the config). Most ops people I encountered will bash you with a club if you add configuration to a Docker Image (in prod/stage) 😅

Author: Fully agree to the importance of good documentation :-).

> Most ops people I encountered will bash you with a club if you add configuration to a Docker Image (in prod/stage) 

I guess i'd be one of them! However, a POC-Guide like that is not a prod-setup. There are dozens of additional things you should consider if you're running on prod, some of them in the hydra-context but most in a very generic way.

Let me see how complicated that would be in the contrib-folder like the kratos one.

gitlab_rails['omniauth_enabled'] = true
gitlab_rails['omniauth_block_auto_created_users'] = false
gitlab_rails['omniauth_providers'] = [
  {
    'name' => 'oauth2_generic',
    'app_id' => 'gitlab',
    'app_secret' => 'theSecret',
    'args' => {
      client_options: {
        'site' => 'http://127.0.0.1:4444', # including port if necessary
        'user_info_url' => 'http://hydra:4444/userinfo',
        'authorize_url' => 'http://127.0.0.1:4444/oauth2/auth',
        'token_url' => 'http://hydra:4444/oauth2/token'
      },
      user_response_structure: {
      },
      # optionally, you can add the following two lines to "white label" the display name
      # of this strategy (appears in urls and Gitlab login buttons)
      # If you do this, you must also replace oauth2_generic, everywhere it appears above, with the new name.
      name: 'ORY_Hydra', # display name for this strategy
      #strategy_class: "OmniAuth::Strategies::OAuth2Generic" # Devise-specific config option Gitlab uses to find renamed strategy
    }
  }
]
```

> After you did these changes, restart the container:

Reviewer: NOTE TO SELF: Reviewed until here
